Extraordinary scenes have been playing
out in ordinary places across the United
States in recent months.
>> Cheer gas in old Irvine Park.
>> Wait, you guys came to the school and to
do this? Do
>> you have a word?
>> What we're seeing is the result of a key
campaign promise from Donald Trump.
>> On day one, I will launch the largest
deportation program in American history.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement,
otherwise known as ICE, is the main
agency implementing his plan to deport
millions of undocumented immigrants. But
other departments are also involved,
including border patrol.
>> These agents are usually stationed along
America's land borders, but they're
increasingly being seen making arrests
in US cities.
>> This is a whole of government effort. We
have never seen anything like this in
the United States of America. This is an
unprecedented effort to reduce the
immigrant population in the country.
>> The Trump administration has reportedly
set ice a goal of 3,000 arrests a day.
They're still some way off that. The
agency's average monthly arrests under
President Trump are about three times as
high as under President Biden over the
same period last year. Trump says anyone
who has entered the country illegally is
a potential target. Former ICE officials
like John Sanweg, who headed the agency
under Barack Obama, say previous
administrations prioritized arresting
those with a criminal record.
>> It'd be a much more targeted surgical
strike. Not nearly as flashy, much lower
profile, and far less controversial. Of
course, what we're see what was happened
here though is the administration didn't
like that approach. And the reason they
didn't like that approach is it doesn't
result in large numbers of arrests. What
this has resulted in is a shift in
tactics away from these more targeted
approaches, but just mass arrests of
people.
>> BBC Verify has gathered more than 70
videos shared on social media of the
current crackdown across several cities
since June, and we found free tactics
being widely used under Trump this term.
Agents concealing their identities.
>> What law enforcement agency?
>> People being arrested outside
immigration courts and other previously
protected places.
and the use of weapons normally
associated with controlling riots like
tear gas on civilians. For your safety,
>> the most widespread tactic we've seen is
officers hiding their faces. In more
than 80% of the videos we analyzed, some
of the officers involved are wearing
face coverings. In seven videos, some
agents are seen in plain clothing with
no clear law enforcement ID on display.
They also often use unmarked vehicles.
Immigration agents have operated
undercover in the past, but the
widespread use of face coverings is new.
According to Deborah Fly Shaker, who was
the acting chief of staff at ICE under
President Biden,
>> masking is not something I've ever seen
done before. Um, these are people we
trust to carry guns on behalf of the
federal government. By being masked and
by failing to identify yourself, I think
that it is it is making the situation
more dangerous and putting people at
risk.
>> The Trump administration says it's
necessary for the protection of the
agents. They report officers and their
families are being threatened online and
that they are facing a more than a,000%
increase in assaults. Although we can't
independently verify this figure,
>> I'm going to answer the mask question.
I'm sorry if people are offended by them
wearing masks, but I'm not going to let
my officers and agents go out there and
put their lives on the line and their
family on the line because people don't
like what immigration enforcement is.
The second tactical shift is where the
arrests are taking place. Before Trump
entered office at the start of this
year, certain locations were typically
out of bounds for immigration
enforcement. But now we're seeing
federal agents in hospitals. Hey, hey,
hey, hey, hey.
>> And they patrol immigration courouses.
When people are coming to court, it's
because they want to be following the
process and trying to gain lawful status
in the United States. It's also because
if they don't come to court, they can be
ordered removed in their absence. So,
it's a catch22.
>> We verified several videos of arrests
taking place at 26 Federal Plaza in New
York. The immigration courthouse here
has become the epicenter of a crackdown
in the city. This incident there went
viral. A woman whose husband had just
been detained confronts an agent.
[Laughter]
>> The officer was temporarily suspended as
a result. The third tactic we've
analyzed is the use of tear gas and
other chemical irritants by officers. We
verified footage of them being used in
eight different incidents. This is a
raid in Los Angeles targeting suspected
illegal immigrants trying to pick up
construction jobs. One agent points
pepper spray at someone filming.
Another deploys what appears to be a
tear gas canister.
>> Hands up for your safety. Hands up for
your safety. Tear gas has also been
deployed against civilians protesting
the crackdown, including in these
incidents which happened in Chicago in
October.
Earlier in the month, a judge in the
city told agents to stop using such
weapons on protesters who pose no
immediate threat and has raised concerns
they still appear to be doing so. Dr.
Rahini Ha has studied the dangers of
deploying tear gas in civilian settings.
It's an indiscriminate weapon and so you
can't really target that towards an
individual that's posing a threat or is
causing harm. It will hit everybody in
the area. It appears that they're using
it excessively and unnecessarily and
quite disproportionately to what the
threat is that's being posed.
>> The Department of Homeland Security says
far-left protesters have interrupted
their work and a published video showing
people throwing objects towards agents.
Congress basically handed ICE a blank
check. Anything they want to do now,
they can afford to do. I think that what
we've seen largely up to this point has
been the opening act, and we're about to
get into the the meat of the
performance.
>> Immigration raids and the protest
against them show no signs of slowing.
Recruitment drives to further bolster
ISIS ranks are well underway. That's
part of a $75 billion package approved
for the agency over the next four years.
This will make it the highest funded law
enforcement body in the US by far.